IN THE EARLY
TWENTIETH CENTURY,
LATIN AMERICA WAS AFLAME
WITH AESTHETIC FERVOR.
PASSIONS RAN HIGH.
MODERNISMO CORRALLED
THE ARTISTIC ENERGIES
OF EUROPE INTO A NEW
AND WHOLLY ORIGINAL
APPROACH TO
LITERATURE.
THE AVANT GARDE PITCHED
ALL OUT WARFARE AGAINST
TRADITIONAL ARTISTIC FORMS
AND MODES OF EXPRESSION.
AND THESE MOVEMENTS
ONLY GATHERED MOMENTUM
IN THE YEARS
THAT FOLLOWED,
FANNED BY THE FLAMES
OF POLITICAL TURMOIL
THAT ERUPTED THROUGHOUT
THE CONTINENT.
IN MEXICO, THE GOVERNMENT
OF PORFIRIO DIAZ
SUCCUMBED TO A MASSIVE
POPULAR INSURRECTION,
GIVING RISE TO ONE OF THE
MOST INFLUENTIAL GENRES
ON THE CONTINENT: THE
REVOLUTIONARY NOVEL.
LATER, IN THE 1930'S, THE
ARGENTINEAN INTELLIGENTSIA
JOINED UP WITH FACTIONS
FROM THE MILITARY TO STAGE
A COUP; YET THE IMPOSITION
OF A CONSERVATIVE REGIME
ONLY INTENSIFIED ARTISTIC
ACTIVITY IN THAT COUNTRY.
SIMILARLY, AN ENTIRE
GENERATION OF CUBAN WRITERS
- INCLUDING THE GREAT
ALEJO CARPENTIER -
WERE OPPRESSED AND
OFTEN IMPRISONED
FOR THEIR OPPOSITION
TO THE DICTATORSHIP
OF GERALDO MACHADO.
THIS PERIOD OF
TUMULT AND CHANGE
FOSTERED THE
DEVELOPMENT OF AUTHORS
WHO WERE TO BECOME ICONS
OF THE MAJOR INTERNATIONAL
EPISODES OF THIS ERA
- THE SPANISH CIVIL WAR,
THE STALINIST DICTATORSHIP,
AND THE SECOND WORLD WAR
THAT WAS LOOMING
ON THE HORIZON.
*
AS A RESULT OF CHRONIC
SOCIAL INSTABILITY,
WRITERS WERE OFTEN USED
AS POLITICAL FOOTBALLS
AND THEIR STATUS WAS IN
A CONSTANT STATE OF FLUX.
MANY WENT INTO EXILE
- VOLUNTARY OR NOT -
FROM THEIR
MOTHER COUNTRIES.
THIS MIGRATION LED TO A
CROSS-FERTILIZATION OF
STYLES AND SENSIBILITIES
THAT GREATLY DIVERSIFIED
THE LITERATURE
OF LATIN AMERICA.
THE DISLOCATION
OF AUTHORS
SUCH AS ALFONSO
REYES IN MEXICO
AND JOSE ORTEGA Y
GASSET IN ARGENTINA
WAS A CRUCIAL
FACTOR IN THEIR
DEVELOPMENT AS WRITERS.
REYES TAPPED INTO HIS
EXPERIENCE AS AN EXILE
TO CREATE A TEXT THAT
MASTERFULLY REVISIONED
THE WAY LATIN
AMERICAN HISTORY
WAS TO BE INTERPRETED:
VISION OF ANAHUAC.
OUR NATURE HAS TWO
OPPOSITE ASPECTS.
ONE, THE HIGHLY PRAISED
VIRGIN FOREST OF AMERICA,
IS HARDLY WORTHY
OF DESCRIPTION.
AN OBLIGATORY TOPIC
OF ADMIRATION
IN THE OLD WORLD,
IT INSPIRES
THE VERBAL ENTHUSIASMS
OF CHATEAUBRIAND.
A LIFE-GIVING OVEN WHERE
ENERGIES SEEM TO BE
WASTED WITH PROFLIGATE
GENEROSITY, WHERE OUR
SPIRIT IS MAROONED IN
INTOXICATING EMANATIONS,
IT IS AN
EXALTATION OF LIFE
AND SIMULTANEOUSLY AN
IMAGE OF VITAL ANARCHY.
OURS, THAT OF ANAHUAC,
IS SOMETHING BETTER
AND MORE TONIC.
AT LEAST, FOR THOSE
WHO LIKE TO KEEP THEIR
WILL ALERT AT ALL TIMES
AND THEIR THOUGHTS CLEAR.
THE MOST FITTING VISION
OF OUR NATURE IS IN THE
CENTRAL MESA REGIONS:
THERE THE VEGETATION
IS TIMID AND HERALDIC,
THE COUNTRYSIDE ORGANIZED,
THE ATMOSPHERE ONE OF
EXCESSIVE SPOTLESSNESS,
IN WHICH THE COLORS
THEMSELVES DROWN,
COMPENSATING THE GENERAL
HARMONY OF THE PICTURE;
THE LUMINOUS ETHER IN
WHICH THINGS MOVE FORWARD
ON THEIR OWN TERMS.
IN HIS INVESTIGATION OF
HIS CULTURE'S INDIGENOUS
HERITAGE, ALFONSO REYES
MINED CLASSIC TEXTS THAT
CHRONICLED THE HISTORY OF
LATIN AMERICA,
INCLUDING HERNAN CORTES'S
LETTERS FROM MEXICO,
AND THE TRUE HISTORY OF
THE CONQUEST OF NEW SPAIN
BY ANOTHER CONQUISTADOR,
BERNAL DIAZ DEL CASTILLO.
REACHING BEYOND MEXICO
CITY TO ITS AZTEC
PREDECESSOR, THE ANCIENT
CITY OF TENOCHTITLAN,
REYES DESCRIBED
A VIBRANT METROPOLIS
OF CONSTANT MOVEMENT.
HE SKETCHED A PORTRAIT
WITH THE MINUTE DETAILS
OF DAILY LIFE,
THE SOUNDS OF THE CITY,
THE CUSTOMS
OF THE PEOPLE.
THE FIGURE OF ALFONSO
REYES IS INDISPENSABLE
NOT ONLY TO THE HISTORY
OF MEXICAN LITERATURE,
BUT ALSO TO THE
CONTINENT'S LITERATURE.
BECAUSE HE'S A MAN
WHO BELONGED TO
THE ATENEO GENERATION.
AND HE REALLY, THANKS IN
LARGE PART TO HIS FIRST
MENTOR PEDRO HENRIQUEZ
URENA, HAD A VERY
BROAD EDUCATION, A
VERY WIDE-RANGING ONE.
REYES POSSESSED AN
EXTRAORDINARY ABILITY
TO BRING THE WORLD OF
INDIGENOUS AMERICANS
TO LIFE, AND HIS WORK
SHED LIGHT ON AN ENTIRELY
NEW WAY OF READING
THE AMERICAN ARCHIVE.
THIS FRESH
VISION OF HISTORY
WOULD FUEL THE POST
WORLD WAR II EXPLOSION
OF LITERARY OUTPUT
IN LATIN AMERICA.
THE PHENOMENON CAME TO
BE KNOWN AS "THE BOOM",
AND WAS REPRESENTED
BY AUTHORS SUCH AS
CARLOS FUENTES,
GABRIEL GARCIA MARQUEZ,
AND MARIO VARGAS LLOSA,
AMONG MANY OTHERS.
THIS NEW VISION OF LOCAL
CULTURE WAS PART OF A
LARGER REASSESSMENT OF
LATIN AMERICAN IDENTITY
THAT WOULD
EVENTUALLY ENCOMPASS
THE ENTIRE CONTINENT.
IN THIS PERIOD OF
REFLECTION THERE AROSE
"POESIA NEGRA",
OR "BLACK POETRY".
THIS FORM
SYNTHESIZED ELEMENTS
OF BLACK AND
WHITE CULTURE
WHILE DESCRIBING BOTH
THE JOYS AND THE AGONY
OF THE AFRICAN
EXPERIENCE IN AMERICA.
THE CUBAN POET NICOLAS
GUILLEN EXPERIMENTED
WITH METER AND FORM TO
REPLICATE THE RHYTHMS
OF A FOLK MUSIC
KNOWN AS "SON"
FROM THE
ISLAND OF HISPANIOLA.
THE MOST IMPORTANT THING
ABOUT NICOLAS GUILLEN'S
POETRY IS THAT IT
DOESN'T TREAT BLACKS
OR BEING BLACK AS AN ISSUE
IN HIS POETIC LITERATURE,
BUT AS A VOICE...
AND THIS IS
A HUGE LEAP.
WHEN NICOLAS GUILLEN
WRITES A POEM AND SAYS,
"TAMBA, TAMBA, TAMBA,
TAMBA, TAMBA DEL NEGRO
QUE TUMBA; TUMBA DEL
NEGRO, CARAMBA, CARAMBA,
QUE EL NEGRO TUMBA".
THE BLACK PERSON ISN'T
JUST A PRESENCE,
AN OBJECT OF STUDY,
AS IT HAD BEEN MANY
TIMES FOR FOLKLORISTS.
BUT HERE IT'S A VOICE.
AND THAT VOICE IS
REALLY VERY IMPORTANT.
THE NON-FICTION ESSAY HAD
ALWAYS BEEN AN IMPORTANT
COMPONENT OF LATIN
AMERICAN LITERATURE.
WRITERS SUCH AS OCTAVIO
PAZ AND SAMUEL RAMOS
IN MEXICO,
AS WELL AS THE DOMINICAN
PEDRO HENRIQUEZ URENA
BREATHED FRESH
LIFE INTO THE GENRE.
URENA WANTED TO USE
LITERATURE AS A PRISM
FOR BREAKING OUT THE
MEANING OF THE TERM
'LATIN AMERICAN',
AND OFFERED UP
A SERIES OF
THEORETICAL APPROACHES.
HIS BOOK LITERARY CURRENTS
IN HISPANIC AMERICA
DESCRIBED THE VARIOUS
IDENTITIES THAT
LATIN AMERICAN
LITERATURE HAD PRODUCED,
AND ATTEMPTED TO
RESCUE FROM OBLIVION
THE LANGUAGE OF THE
MESTIZO CULTURE.
THE LITERARY
ORIENTATION OF THE TIME
IS ROMANTICISM.
ROMANTICISM PROPOSED
TO EACH NATION,
THE CREATION OF
THEIR OWN STYLE,
SUSTAINED BY
THEIR TRADITIONS.
THIS WAS THE TENDENCY
OF THE YOUNG WRITERS
OF THE RIO
DE LA PLATA,
AND THE REST OF THE
SPANISH AMERICAN COUNTRIES.
IF THEIR COMMITMENT
WAS SOMEHOW NOT ENOUGH,
IT WAS BECAUSE A STYLE
IS NOT EASILY DEVELOPED
WHEN LED BY WILL.
AS FAR AS THEMES GO,
WE COULD SAY THAT
THEY UNDERTOOK A
METHODIC EXPLORATION
OF THEIR OWN LANDS: THE
LANDSCAPES, FROM THE
INACCESSIBLE CORDILLERA
TO THE ENDLESS FLATLANDS;
THE INDIGENOUS TRADITION,
THE COLONIAL TRADITION,
AND BETWEEN THEM, THE
COLLISION OF CONQUEST.
THE CULTURAL ESSAY
QUICKLY BECAME CENTRAL
TO RETELLING LATIN
AMERICAN HISTORY.
THE GENRE GOT A
SUBSTANTIAL BOOST
FROM THE ARGENTINEAN
EZEQUIEL MARTINEZ ESTRADA,
AN ESSAYIST KNOWN
FOR HIS EXUBERANT
AND EMPHATIC PROSE.
THROUGH THE UNFOLDING
DIALECTIC OF HISTORY,
HE SOUGHT OUT THE REASONS
FOR THE AMERICAN PRESENT
IN THE AMERICAN PAST.
MARTINEZ ESTRADA WROTE
EXTENSIVELY ABOUT
NIETZSCHE, MONTAIGNE, AND
KAFKA, AND EXAMINED THE
THEMES OF "CIVILIZATION"
VERSUS "BARBARISM" THAT
HAD BEEN FIRST PUT FORTH
BY THE INFLUENTIAL WRITER
DOMINGO FAUSTINO
SARMIENTO.
THIS FRAMEWORK OF CHANGE
AND EXPERIMENTATION
GAVE RISE TO WRITERS
WHO PREFIGURED
THE LATIN
AMERICAN BOOM.
THESE WERE
SOLITARY VOICES,
WRITERS IN SEARCH
OF AN IDENTITY.
PERHAPS THE MOST MARGINAL
OF THEM ALL, SET APART
FROM MODERNISM AND THE
VANGUARDS OF THE EARLY
TWENTIETH CENTURY, WAS
THE ARGENTINEAN NOVELIST,
PLAYWRIGHT, AND SHORT
STORY WRITER ROBERTO ARLT.
ARLT MAKES A BREAK WITH
ROMANTICISM AND HIS
WRITING COMES TO BE
POPULATED WITH METAPHORS
THAT COME FROM THE WORLD
OF TECHNOLOGY, FROM THE
20'S, FROM TECHNOLOGY AND
FROM SCIENTIFIC ADVANCES.
SO ARLT'S IMAGINATION
IS POPULATED BY
ALL THE TRAPPINGS
OF MODERNITY.
THERE ARE VERY
FEW REFERENCES
BACK TO THE PAST.
ARLT'S FIRST NOVEL, THE
ANGRY TOY, FROM 1926,
WAS DEDICATED TO
FELLOW ARGENTINE
AND GAUCHO AUTHOR
RICARDO GUIRALDES.
ITS ADOLESCENT
PROTAGONIST,
SILVIO ASTIER, HAILS FROM
HUMBLE CIRCUMSTANCES.
DESPITE HIS LOW BIRTH,
SILVIO CUTS A HEROIC FIGURE
- HE'S ONE
OF THOSE PEOPLE
FOR WHOM EVERYTHING
SEEMS TO COME EASILY.
ARLT'S COMING-OF-AGE
STORY WAS BASED ON A
SERIALIZED NOVEL ENTITLED
THEEXPLOITS OF ROCAMBOLE
BY THE FRENCH
GOTHIC WRITER
PIERRE ALEXIS
PONSON DU TERRAIL.
ADOPTING PONSON DU
TERRAIL'S FANCIFUL
AND ADVENTUROUS
STYLE ENABLED ARLT
TO FASHION A TALE BOTH
CYNICAL AND FANTASTICAL.
HIS NOVEL IS AN ESCAPE
FROM THE DAILY GRIND
THAT ALSO DOUBLES AS
POINTED COMMENTARY.
THE ANGRY TOY ELICITED
IMPASSIONED PRAISE FROM
THE YOUNG INTELLECTUALS OF
THE ERA, WHO WERE QUICK TO
CONTRAST IT WITH THE WORK
OF OLD GUARD WRITERS
SUCH AS LEOPOLDO LUGONES,
MANUEL GALVEZ,
AND EVEN
HORACIO QUIROGA,
A PROGENITOR OF
MAGICAL REALISM.
MEANWHILE, ARLT DEDICATED
HIMSELF TO JOURNALISM,
PUBLISHING HIS DAILY COLUMN
"BUENOS AIRES ETCHINGS"
IN THE NEWSPAPER EL
MUNDO, A PLATFORM THAT
PROVIDED HIM WITH A
WIDE PUBLIC READERSHIP.
THIS FORUM ALSO ENABLED
ARLT TO LEGITIMIZE
A MORE COLLOQUIAL APPROACH
TO LANGUAGE, WITHIN THE
CONTEXT OF THE INCREASED
PROFESSIONALIZATION OF
WRITING WHICH WAS TAKING
PLACE IN THE THIRTIES.
MY EDITOR HAS ASKED ME NOT
TO USE THE WORD "BERRETIN"
[PIGHEADEDNESS] BECAUSE
THE NEWSPAPER GOES TO
FAMILIES, AND THE WORD
BERRETIN MIGHT SOUND
BAD TO THEM, BUT I
RESPECTFULLY ASK
PERMISSION FROM THE LADIES
OF THE HOUSE TO USE THE
SWEET AND MELLIFLUOUS
WORD BERRETIN TODAY.
THE CITY, RIFE WITH
CONTRADICTIONS AND THE
DISPLACED MODERNITY
OF THE CONTINENT,
IS OMNIPRESENT IN
ALL OF ARLT'S FICTION.
IT IS EVEN AN AGENT IN THE
ACT OF CREATION ITSELF.
ARLT PENNED HIS NOVELS
THE SEVEN MADMEN,
THE FLAMETHROWERS, AND
LOVE, THE MAGICIAN
IN THE DINGY BARS
AND POVERTY-STRICKEN
BOARDING HOUSES OF
CENTRAL BUENOS AIRES.
THE PACE AND INTENSITY
OF ARLT'S WORK
DAMAGED HIS HEALTH,
AND HE DIED YOUNG,
ON JULY 26TH, 1942.
THE LAST ARTICLE HE
WROTE WAS ENTITLED
"THE LANDSCAPE
OF THE CLOUDS".
IN POSTERITY HE HAS BECOME
A GALVANIZING FIGURE,
ONE WHO MITIGATES THE
CLASS-CONSCIOUS BIAS
OF EARLY TWENTIETH
CENTURY LITERATURE
AND RETURNS LITERATURE
TO THE PEOPLE.
ARLT IS AN IMMIGRANT,
THE CHILD OF POVERTY WHO
NONETHELESS HAS ACCESS TO
OPPORTUNITY IN ARGENTINA,
WHICH IS CONSTANTLY
GROWING.
HE'S A WRITER WHO CHOOSES
TO TURN HIS BACK ON
AESTHETIC INVESTIGATION,
IN ONE SENSE.
AND IN ANOTHER SENSE, HE
TAKES IN AS MUCH AS HE CAN.
BUT IT'S A WILD
PLACE, A NAIVE PLACE.
THE MID-TWENTIETH CENTURY
WAS AN ERA OF LARGE-SCALE
MIGRATORY CURRENTS
THAT FOREVER ALTERED
THE FACE OF LATIN
AMERICAN CITIES.
THIS PROCESS OF CHANGE
ALSO FORCED A REASSESSMENT
OF PROBLEMATIC ISSUES
THAT HAD PERSISTED SINCE
LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES
GAINED INDEPENDENCE
FROM THEIR COLONIAL
OVERLORDS; ISSUES LIKE
WHAT CONSTITUTES A
"NATIONAL LANGUAGE,"
WHAT A CULTURE CAN
CLAIM TO BE ITS OWN,
AND HOW TO RESPOND
WHEN DISPARATE
CULTURES COME TOGETHER.
THESE TENSIONS APPLIED
CONSTANT PRESSURE
ON CULTURAL AND SOCIAL
INSTITUTIONS - TENSIONS
WHICH WERE PLAYED OUT
PARTICULARLY IN THE SCHOOLS,
WHERE PERSONAL IDENTITY
IS OFTEN LEARNED
AGAINST THE BACKDROP OF
THE LARGER COMMUNITY.
ARLT'S LITERATURE LAID
BARE THE CONTRADICTIONS,
TRANSFORMATIONS,
AND INSTABILITY
THAT DEFINED HIS TIMES.
IN STARK CONTRAST
STANDS LEOPOLDO LUGONES,
THE ARGENTINEAN
WRITER AND CRITIC
WHO CAME TO BE KNOWN AS
A CUSTODIAN OF LANGUAGE.
IN THIS ROLE, HE LAID
CLAIM TO A NOTION OF
NATIONHOOD AND
NATIONAL LANGUAGE
THAT SPRANG FROM
THE MYTHIC IMAGE
OF THE RUGGED,
COW-HERDING GAUCHOS.
LUGONES INSCRIBED NATIONAL
HISTORY AND LITERATURE
ONTO THE
RURAL LANDSCAPE,
IMAGINATIVELY
LINKING THE ILIAD
WITH MARTIN FIERRO,
THE FAMOUS EPIC POEM
BY THE ARGENTINE
WRITER JOSE HERNANDEZ.
LUGONES PUT FORTH HIS
IDEAS IN A SERIES OF
MASTERFUL LECTURES,
COLLECTED IN HIS
CELEBRATED VOLUME
EL PAYADOR.
AND THEN THERE CAME
JORGE LUIS BORGES.
BORN IN 1899 IN BUENOS
AIRES, BORGES WOULD BECOME
ONE OF THE FOREMOST
LITERARY FIGURES
OF THE
TWENTIETH CENTURY.
A WIDE-RANGING
WRITER AND CRITIC,
HE TOOK IT UPON HIMSELF
TO DISTINGUISH THE
NATIONAL VOICE FROM
ITS CREOLE REFERENT.
IN HIS BOOK THE SIZE OF MY
HOPE, PUBLISHED IN 1926,
HE WROTE IN CRYPTIC TERMS
ABOUT HIS UNDERTAKING
AS A WRITER.
BROTHER MOCHO AND HIS
SUCCESSOR FELIX LIMA
ARE THE ORDINARINESS
DISCUSSED IN THE SUBURB;
EVARISTO CARRIEGO,
THE SADNESS OF HIS
DISINCLINATION
AND BREAKDOWN.
AFTERWARDS I CAME
(AS LONG AS I LIVE,
THERE WILL ALWAYS BE
SOMEONE TO PRAISE ME)
AND I SAID BEFORE
ANYONE, NOT THE FATES,
BUT THE LANDSCAPE OF
THE OUTLYING AREAS:
THE GROCERY STORE PINK LIKE
A CLOUD, THE ALLEYWAYS.
ROBERTO ARLT AND
JOSE TALLON ARE THE
SHAMELESSNESS OF THE
SUBURB, ITS FEROCITY.
EVERY ONE OF US HAS SAID
HIS PIECE ON THE SUBURB;
NO ONE HAS SAID IT
IN ITS ENTIRETY.
BORGES QUICKLY BECAME
A CULTURAL TOUCHPOINT
AS WELL AS THE
GOLD STANDARD
FOR LEGIONS OF
WRITERS AND READERS.
HIS EARLY WORK WAS
MARKED BY THE INFLUENCE
OF ULTRAISM, THE
SPANISH-BORN MOVEMENT
THAT PUT ITSELF OUT AS AN
ALTERNATIVE TO MODERNISMO,
THE DISTINCTLY LATIN
AMERICAN COMMINGLING
OF ROMANTIC AND
SYMBOLIST SENSIBILITIES.
SUCCESS DID NOT
COME IMMEDIATELY;
BORGES HAD TO SUBSIDIZE
THE PUBLICATION
OF HIS FIRST BOOKS
OF POEMS HIMSELF,
AND HE WOULD
DISTRIBUTE HIS WORKS
BY SNEAKING THEM IN
HIS FRIEND'S BAGS.
HIS MOST IMPORTANT
PROFESSIONAL AND
INTELLECTUAL ASSOCIATION
WAS WITH VICTORIA OCAMPO
- INTELLECTUAL,
PATRON, AND PUBLISHER
OF THE FABLED REVIEW
SUR, OR SOUTH.
IT WAS IN ISSUE NUMBER
FIVE OF SUR THAT BORGES
LAID OUT A LITERARY CREDO
THAT MANY HAVE INTERPRETED
AS THE PRECURSOR
OF MAGICAL REALISM.
THAT WAS NOT HIS
INTENTION, HOWEVER.
WHAT HE'D MEANT TO
DO WAS SIMPLY TO
COME OUT IN OPPOSITION
TO PURE REALISM,
AN AESTHETIC
MOVEMENT THAT WAS
SWEEPING
THROUGH THE ARTS
IN THE EARLY PART OF
THE TWENTIETH CENTURY.
IN THE ESSAY, ENTITLED
"NARRATIVE ART AND MAGIC",
BORGES DREW A
DISTINCTION BETWEEN
TWO PROCESSES
OF FICTION.
THE NATURAL, WHICH IS
THE INCESSANT RESULT OF
UNCONTROLLABLE AND
INFINITE OPERATIONS;
AND MAGIC
LUCID AND LIMITED,
WHERE THE PARTICULARS
ARE PROPHESIED.
IN THE NOVEL, I THINK
THE ONLY POSSIBLE HONOR
LIES WITH THE LATTER.
LET THE FORMER BE FOR
PSYCHOLOGICAL SIMULATION.
IN THE 1940'S,
BORGES TURNED OUT
SOME OF HIS MOST
IMPORTANT WORKS:
THE GARDEN OF FORKING
PATHS IN 1941;
FICTIONS IN 1944,
AND THE ALEPH IN 1949.
HIS COMPLEX WORLD VIEW -
COSMOPOLITAN YET LOW-BROW,
POETIC YET PEDESTRIAN
- IS EXPRESSED IN LANGUAGE
THAT IS BOTH PRECISE
AND ONEROUS.
IN THESE FIRST VOLUMES,
BORGES WANTS TO RECLAIM
THE NATIONAL STORY AND
TO REWRITE IT CONCISELY,
A VERY SYNTHETIC
FORM, FOR POETRY.
AND BORGES IS ALSO THE
POET OF "LA RECOLETA".
HE WANTS TO THINK
ABOUT DEATH.
HOW ARGENTINE
HISTORY EVOLVES
AND IS SYNTHESIZED
IN A HEADSTONE.
AND BORGES' GREAT
QUESTION IS ALWAYS:
HOW CAN WE, UPON
WRITING OUR NAME,
REACH IMMORTALITY?
AND THIS IS A
THEME FOR BORGES
THAT IS ALWAYS
PRESENT.
I COME NOW TO THE
INEFFABLE CENTER
OF MY TALE; IT
IS HERE THAT
MY WRITER'S
HOPELESSNESS BEGINS.
ALL LANGUAGE IS AN
ALPHABET OF SYMBOLS
WHOSE USE ASSUMES A PAST
SHARED BY ITS INTERLOCUTORS;
HOW CAN ONE TRANSMIT TO
OTHERS THE INFINITE ALEPH,
WHICH MY TIMOROUS MEMORY
CAN BARELY CONTAIN?
BORGES BREATHED NEW LIFE
INTO THE FANTASY GENRE.
HE IMBUED IT
WITH METAPHYSICS,
AND GRANTED FANTASY
NEW COORDINATES
THAT ALTERED NOT ONLY THE
WAY THE GENRE WAS WRITTEN
BUT ALSO THE
WAY IT WAS READ.
THE LABYRINTHINE GAMES
AND THE MYSTICAL SLANT
OF HIS BEST-KNOWN STORIES
WERE HIGHLY ORIGINAL
AND WIDELY INFLUENTIAL.
SOME CRITICS HAVE GONE SO
FAR AS TO CLAIM THAT HIS
FICTION ALTERED THE REALITY
OF LITERATURE ITSELF.
YET BORGES HIMSELF
INSISTED THAT
HIS TRUE AMBITIONS
WERE MODEST.
I DO NOT WRITE FOR
A SELECT MINORITY,
WHICH MEANS NOTHING
TO ME, NOR FOR THAT
ADULATED PLATONIC ENTITY
KNOWN AS 'THE MASSES'.
BOTH ABSTRACTIONS, SO
DEAR TO THE DEMAGOGUE,
I DISBELIEVE IN.
I WRITE FOR MYSELF
AND FOR MY FRIENDS,
AND I WRITE TO EASE
THE PASSING OF TIME.
BORGES WAS LINKED WITH A
GROUP OF WRITERS KNOWN AS
THE "MARTINFIERRISTAS",
SO NAMED BECAUSE
THEY WERE OFTEN
FEATURED IN THE PAGES
OF THE LITERARY
JOURNAL MARTIN FIERRO.
HOWEVER, IN THE
POLITICAL REALM,
HE FOUND HIMSELF
DEEPLY ISOLATED.
LOOMING OVER HIS CAREER
WAS THE COMMANDING FIGURE
OF JUAN DOMINGO PERON, THE
POPULIST ARGENTINE LEADER
WHOM BORGES
STRONGLY DENOUNCED.
ACCORDING TO THE
EMINENT CRITIC
EMIR RODRIGUEZ
MONEGAL,
THE VERY CHARACTER
OF BORGES' WRITING
CHANGED DURING THE
PERON GOVERNMENT.
THE MYTHICAL ELEMENT OF
BUENOS AIRES DRAINED OUT
OF HIS STORIES, AND THE
COLORFUL CHARACTERS AND
VIVID LOCATIONS WERE
NOWHERE TO BE FOUND.
WHAT I FIND INTERESTING
IN BORGES' EVOLUTION,
BEYOND HIS PROSE AND POETRY,
IS THAT HIS FIRST TEXTS
HAVE TO DO WITH THE
POOR NEIGHBORHOODS,
WITH THE GAUCHOS, WITH
THE BUENOS AIRES SUBURBS.
STORIES LIKE "THE MAN
FROM THE PINK CORNER".
THE "MILONGAS"
THAT BORGES WROTE,
THE "MILONGA DE
JACINTO CHICLANA"
TO THE POINT WHERE HE
HIMSELF RECOGNIZES
THAT THOSE TEXTS
DIDN'T SATISFY HIM
COMPLETELY AND
THAT, IN A WAY,
THAT "FAMOUS BORGES"
HAD APPROPRIATED THEM
AND HE HAD TO COME
UP WITH SOMETHING ELSE.
THE CLASSIC BORGES STORY
WAS A MIX OF MALICE
AND LITERARY MASTERY
THAT UNITED HIGH ART
WITH POPULAR CULTURE.
HIS BEAUTIFULLY WROUGHT
TALES OF TROUBLEMAKERS
AND NE'ER-DO-WELLS
TRANSCEND THEIR PARTICULARS
AND JOIN THE PANTHEON
OF WORLD LITERATURE.
YET HE TOOK PAINS TO
SQUARELY PLACE HIS WORK
IN THE CONTEXT OF A
SPECIFIC TIME AND PLACE
THROUGH ESSAYS SUCH AS
THE ARGENTINE WRITER
AND TRADITION,
OR THE LANGUAGE
OF THE ARGENTINES.
HIS ESSAYS DWELT IN
THE METAPHYSICAL,
AS IN HIS BOOK
ON ETERNITY.
FROM A VERY YOUNG AGE,
BORGES WAS A PHILOSOPHER
OF LANGUAGE.
HE WAS A PHILOSOPHER
OF EXPRESSION,
AND OF ITS
IMPOSSIBILITY.
AND THAT BORGES
IS THE ONE THAT
GIVES RISE TO THE
OTHER THAT WE KNOW,
THAT MIX OF HIGH AND LOW
CULTURE THAT IS SORT OF
A PREVIEW OF WHAT WE NOW
CALL CULTURAL STUDIES.
BECAUSE HE DOES NOT
MAKE A MONSTROSITY
LIKE SOME OTHER HYBRIDS.
WHAT HE DOES IS
DEMONSTRATE HOW ONE THING,
IF YOU TWIST IT JUST A
BIT, CAN BECOME ANOTHER.
AND YET, AND YET...
DENYING TEMPORAL
SUCCESSION,
DENYING THE SELF, DENYING
THE ASTRONOMICAL UNIVERSE,
ARE OBVIOUS ACTS
OF DESPERATION
AND SECRET CONSOLATION.
OUR FATE (UNLIKE THE
HELL OF SWEDENBORG
OR THE HELL OF
TIBETAN MYTHOLOGY)
IS NOT FRIGHTFUL
BECAUSE IT IS UNREAL;
IT IS FRIGHTFUL BECAUSE IT
IS IRREVERSIBLE AND IRONCLAD.
TIME IS THE THING
I AM MADE OF.
TIME IS A RIVER THAT
SWEEPS ME ALONG,
BUT I AM THE RIVER;
IT IS A TIGER
THAT TEARS ME APART,
BUT I AM THE TIGER;
IT IS A FIRE
THAT CONSUMES ME,
BUT I AM THE FIRE.
THE WORLD,
UNFORTUNATELY, IS REAL;
I, UNFORTUNATELY,
AM BORGES.
JUST AS LONG-FORM FICTION
WAS REVITALIZED BY THE
ADVENT OF THE MEXICAN
REVOLUTIONARY NOVEL,
SO WAS LATIN AMERICAN
POETRY POINTED IN A
NEW DIRECTION DURING THE
MID-TWENTIETH CENTURY.
IN THIS CASE, IT WAS
AT THE HANDS OF THE
MAGNIFICENT MEXICAN POET,
ESSAYIST, AND INTELLECTUAL
OCTAVIO PAZ.
THE SOURCES
OF INSPIRATION
FOR HIS EARLY
POEMS VARIED WIDELY,
FROM MARXISM, SURREALISM,
AND EXISTENTIALISM,
TO THE BUDDHIST AND HINDU
RELIGIOUS TRADITIONS.
HE WAS, HOWEVER, A
REVOLUTIONARY TO THE
CORE OF HIS BEING,
AS HE FAMOUSLY ATTESTED
IN HIS STUDY OF
MEXICAN IDENTITY,
ENTITLED THE
LABYRINTH OF SOLITUDE.
IT IS THE REVOLUTION,
THE MAGICAL WORD,
THE WORD THAT WILL
CHANGE IT ALL AND
THAT WILL GIVE US A GREAT
JOY AND A QUICK DEATH.
FOR THE REVOLUTION THE
MEXICAN PEOPLE BECOME
LOST IN THOUGHT,
IN THEIR PAST
AND IN THEIR ESSENCE, TO
EXTRACT THEIR FILIATION
FROM THEIR PRIVATE
LIFE, FROM THEIR CORE.
PAZ WAS BORN INTO
TURBULENT TIMES,
AND REVOLUTION CONTINUED
TO DEFINE MEXICO
THROUGHOUT HIS LIFETIME.
THE MEXICAN PRESIDENT
LAZARO CARDENAS,
WHO SERVED FROM
1934 THROUGH 1940,
GAVE NEW MOMENTUM TO
THE CYCLE OF CHANGE.
HE IMPLEMENTED AGRARIAN
REFORM, CREATED LABOR AND
PEASANT ORGANIZATIONS, AND
PROMOTED PUBLIC EDUCATION.
PAZ HIMSELF
EXPANDED HIS HORIZONS,
TRAVELING TO SPAIN
TO PARTICIPATE
IN A CONGRESS OF
ANTI-FASCIST WRITERS.
HE LATER WAS ONE OF THE
FOUNDERS OF THE JOURNAL,
TALLER, OR WORKSHOP,
AND HE TRAVELED TO
THE UNITED STATES ON A
GUGGENHEIM FELLOWSHIP.
HE BECAME DEEPLY
DISCOURAGED
BY A SERIES OF
DARK EVENTS:
HITLER TAKING
CONTROL IN GERMANY;
STALIN'S CONSOLIDATION
OF POWER IN THE USSR;
THE OUTBREAK OF THE
SPANISH CIVIL WAR,
AND THE ASSASSINATION OF
THE EXILED SOVIET COMMUNIST
LEON TROTSKY.
PAZ DESCRIBED HIS
POLITICAL TRANSFORMATION
IN THE LABYRINTH
OF SOLITUDE.
BETWEEN 1930 AND 1940,
AS MUCH IN EUROPE AS IN
AMERICA, MOST OF US THEN
YOUNG WRITERS FELT A GREAT
SYMPATHY FOR THE RUSSIAN
REVOLUTION AND COMMUNISM.
OUR ATTITUDE WAS A
MIXTURE OF GOOD FEELINGS,
RIGHTEOUS INDIGNATION
AT THE INJUSTICES
THAT SURROUNDED US,
AND IGNORANCE.
MY DOUBTS
BEGAN IN 1939,
WITH THE SIGNING OF THE
GERMAN-SOVIET PACT.
THE DOUBTS WERE
TRANSFORMED INTO CRITICISM.
MANY LEFTIST
INTELLECTUALS OF THE TIME
REJECTED PAZ'S DENUNCIATION
OF FAR LEFT POLITICS.
HOWEVER, IN BUENOS
AIRES HIS POSITION WAS
WELL RECEIVED BY JOSE
BIANCO AND VICTORIA OCAMPO.
THEY PUBLISHED THE
LABYRINTH OF SOLITUDE
IN THE JOURNAL
SUR IN 1951,
BOTH AS A PIECE OF
POLITICAL LITERATURE
AND FOR ITS INHERENT
AESTHETIC VALUE.
AS HIS POEMS BEGAN TO
CIRCULATE THROUGHOUT
THE CONTINENT, PAZ
BECAME THE CHAMPION
OF A NEW, EROTICIZED
STRAIN OF VERSE.
INFLUENCED BY WRITERS SUCH
AS THE MARQUIS DE SADE
AND THE FRENCH SURREALIST
GEORGES BATAILLE,
HIS WORK EXUDED A RAW
SENSUALITY WHICH HE
CLOTHED IN THE IMAGERY
OF MEXICAN MYTHOLOGY.
THIS SENSIBILITY OPENED
THE WAY FOR AN INFUSION
OF FAR EASTERN
THEMES INTO HIS WORK.
PAZ HAD BEEN AN AVID
STUDENT OF BUDDHIST AND
TAOIST THOUGHT BEFORE
SETTING OFF ON EXTENDED
TOURS TO INDIA AND JAPAN
AS A MEXICAN DIPLOMAT.
THESE INFLUENCES
BROUGHT ADDED TEXTURE
AND COLORATION
TO HIS VERSES.
IT RAINED.
THE HOUR IS AN
ENORMOUS EYE.
INSIDE IT, WE COME AND
GO LIKE REFLECTIONS.
THE RIVER OF MUSIC
ENTERS MY BLOOD.
IF I SAY "BODY",
IT ANSWERS "WIND".
IF I SAY "EARTH",
IT ANSWERS "WHERE?"
THE WORLD, A DOUBLE
BLOSSOM, OPENS:
SADNESS OF HAVING COME,
JOY OF BEING HERE.
I WALK LOST IN
MY OWN CENTER.
ANOTHER LATIN AMERICAN
POET WHO DID NOT
SHY AWAY FROM
EROTIC THEMES
WAS THE CHILEAN
WRITER PABLO NERUDA.
BORN IN 1904, BY THE AGE
OF TWENTY HE PUBLISHED
AN INTENSELY EROTIC
BOOK OF POEMS CALLED
TWENTY LOVE POEMS AND
A SONG OF DESPAIR.
THE BOOK WAS AN
INTERNATIONAL SUCCESS.
BY THE 1930'S
HE HAD CONQUERED
THE LITERARY WORLD.
IN 1936 HIS MORE MATURE AND
AMBITIOUS BOOK OF POEMS,
RESIDENCE ON EARTH,
OFFERED DEFINITIVE PROOF
THAT NERUDA WAS ONE OF
THE WORLD'S GREATEST
CONTEMPORARY POETS.
THIS WAS A TIME
OF GREAT UPHEAVAL
IN THE
SPANISH-SPEAKING WORLD.
THE SPANISH CIVIL
WAR BROKE OUT AND,
SHORTLY THEREAFTER, THE
SPANISH PLAYWRIGHT AND POET
FEDERICO GARCIA LORCA
WAS ASSASSINATED.
NERUDA TRAVELED TO SPAIN
TO RAISE MONEY AND SUPPORT
FOR THE REPUBLICANS, AND
WROTE SPAIN IN MY HEART
AS AN EXPRESSION
OF SOLIDARITY.
WITH THE ENGLISH WRITER
AND POLITICAL ACTIVIST
NANCY CUNARD, HE FOUNDED
A MAGAZINE CALLED
THE POETS OF THE WORLD
DEFEND THE SPANISH PEOPLE.
IN 1939, HE PUT OUT A
BOOK OF POEMS ENTITLED
FURIES AND SORROWS.
BUT IN ANY CASE, THE
OBJECT OF HIS WORKS IS
CLEARLY PEOPLE, ATTITUDES
THAT ARE DIFFERENT.
THERE'S A PROPHETIC NATURE
TO NERUDA'S POETRY.
HE REALLY PUTS OUT THERE
ALL THE POSSIBILITIES,
THE RICHNESS
OF THE LANGUAGE.
KEEPING IN MIND
THE MUSICALITY,
HOW REPETITION
REVERBERATES.
NERUDA IS A POET
WHO DISCOUNTS
PRACTICALLY NOTHING.
THE PERUVIAN POET,
CESAR VALLEJO,
WAS BORN IN A REMOTE VILLAGE
IN THE ANDES OF PERU,
THE YOUNGEST OF
11 CHILDREN.
IN 1922 HE PUBLISHED A BOOK
OF POEMS CALLED TRILCE,
WHICH ESTABLISHED
HIM AS ONE OF THE
PREEMINENT POETIC VOICES
OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY.
HE BECAME DEEPLY INVOLVED
IN THE SPANISH CIVIL WAR,
AND IN 1930 PUBLISHED SPAIN,
TAKE THIS CUP FROM ME.
CHILDREN OF THE EARTH,
IF SPAIN FALLS,
I SAY IT'S A MANNER
OF SPEAKING -
IF THERE SHOULD FALL
DOWN FROM THE SKY
HER FOREARM, WHICH IS
SEIZED AND PULLED ALONG
BY TWO
EARTH-FORGED PLATES;
CHILDREN, WHAT AN AGE
OF SUNKEN TEMPLES!
HOW EARLY IN THE SUN
WHAT I WAS TELLING YOU!
HOW SOON WITHIN YOUR
BREAST THE ANCIENT CLAMOR!
HOW OLD YOUR TWO
IN THE QUARTO.
CHILDREN OF THE EARTH,
HERE IS MOTHER SPAIN
WITH HER BELLY
ON HER BACK!
HERE IS OUR TEACHER
WITH HER YARDSTICK,
SHE IS MOTHER AND TEACHER,
CROSS AND TIMBER,
BECAUSE SHE GAVE
YOU THE HEIGHT,
VERTIGO AND DIVISION
AND SUM, CHILDREN,
IT'S UP TO HER,
FATHERS OF DUE PROCESS.
IF SHE FALLS - I SAY, IT'S
A MANNER OF SPEAKING -
IF SPAIN FALLS, FROM
THE EARTH DOWNWARDS,
CHILDREN! HOW YOU ARE
GOING TO STOP GROWING!
IN THE PERIOD BEFORE THE
BOOM IN LATIN AMERICAN
LITERATURE, THE FIELD
OF CULTURAL PRODUCTION
WAS INTENSELY FOCUSED
ON DEFINING THE ROLE
AND MEANING OF
STORY TELLING.
WHILE POETRY TYPICALLY SET
THE CULTURAL COURSE OF THE
CONTINENT, THIS PERIOD SAW
AN EXPLOSION OF INTEREST
IN THE ROLE OF NARRATIVE IN
DEFINING REGIONAL IDENTITY,
CLASS IDENTITY,
AND LANGUAGE.
THESE ISSUES WERE GIVEN
SHAPE BY THE URUGUAYAN
LITERARY CRITIC ANGEL
RAMA IN HIS BOOK
NARRATIVES OF
TRANSCULTURATION,
IN WHICH HE CALLS FOR THE
ALIGNMENT OF LITERATURE
WITH LARGER SOCIAL AND
HISTORICAL FACTORS.
FOR RAMA, POLITICS, PROSE,
AND THE PROBLEMS THAT
DEFINED LATIN AMERICA WERE
ALL INEXTRICABLY LINKED.
HE PLUMBED THE WORK OF
THE CUBAN ANTHROPOLOGIST
FERNANDO ORTIZ, WHO HAD
REINTERPRETED THE DYNAMICS
OF SOCIAL CONTACT AND
COMMERCIAL PRODUCTION
IN HIS FAMOUS ESSAY
CUBAN COUNTERPOINT
OF TOBACCO AND SUGAR.
RAMA USED THE TERM
"NARRATIVE TRANSCULTURATORS"
TO IDENTIFY WRITERS WHO
SYNTHESIZED ELEMENTS
FROM FAMILIAR AND
FOREIGN CULTURES.
THESE ARE THE WRITERS
WHO MAKE A CAREER OUT OF
STEPPING OUTSIDE
THEMSELVES,
AND LOOKING BACK AT THEIR
WORLD AS A BEMUSED OUTSIDER.
THE PERUVIAN
ANTHROPOLOGIST AND WRITER
JOSE MARIA ARGUEDAS, HAD
ONE FOOT IN WHITE CULTURE
AND THE OTHER IN THE
TRADITIONAL WORLD
OF THE QUECHUA INDIANS.
HE ATTEMPTED TO
CREATE WHAT HE CALLED
"THE OPERA OF THE POOR",
WHICH PORTRAYED SOCIETY
EXACTLY AS HE
EXPERIENCED IT.
YET HE WAS CONFRONTED
WITH ENORMOUS CHALLENGES:
HOW DO YOU TRANSCRIBE THE
WORLDVIEW OF MARGINALIZED
CULTURES INTO THE IDIOM OF
THE MAINSTREAM CULTURE?
HOW DO YOU LITERALLY
AND METAPHORICALLY
TRANSLATE THE LANGUAGE
OF SUBORDINATION
INTO THE LANGUAGE OF THE
DOMINANT SOCIAL FORCE?
THESE CHALLENGES
ALSO CONFRONTED THE
CUBAN NOVELIST ALEJO
CARPENTIER, WHO NARRATED
THE EXPERIENCE OF
AFRO-AMERICAN CULTURE
IN A DISTINCTLY BAROQUE
LITERARY VOICE.
AS SUCH, CARPENTIER
IS OFTEN CITED AS A
HERALD OF THE LATIN
AMERICAN BOOM.
I WOULDN'T SAY CARPENTIER'S
WORK IS FANTASTICAL.
AT LEAST IT DOESN'T
INTEND TO BE.
WHAT HE INTENDS TO BE IS A
REALIST, BUT HE BELIEVES
THAT WHICH IS THE MAGICAL
IS A PART OF REALITY.
CARPENTIER IS A VERY
IMPORTANT WRITER.
IN A WAY HE GAVE
THEORETICAL FOUNDATION
TO WHAT WOULD LATER BE
CALLED MAGICAL REALISM,
A PATH THAT HAS
LATER BEEN FOLLOWED
BY MORE AND
MORE WRITERS.
HIS AESTHETIC THEORY OF
"LO REAL MARAVILLOSO" -
"THE MARVELOUS REAL" -
HAS BEEN INTERPRETED
BY MANY CRITICS AS
ONE OF THE ORIGINS OF
WHAT CAME TO BE KNOWN
AS "MAGICAL REALISM".
THROUGH HIS MYTHIC AND
FANTASTICAL WRITING,
HE BLAZED NEW TRAILS FOR
THE LATIN AMERICAN NOVEL.
CARPENTIER DESCRIBED THE
POWER OF HIS APPROACH
IN THE PROLOGUE TO THE
KINGDOM OF THIS WORLD.
THE MARVELOUS BECOMES
UNEQUIVOCALLY MARVELOUS
WHEN IT ARISES FROM
AN UNEXPECTED CHANGE
IN REALITY -
A MIRACLE - A PRIVILEGED
REVELATION OF REALITY,
FROM AN UNUSUAL OR
SINGULARLY FAVORABLE
ILLUMINATION OF THE
UNNOTICED RICHES
OF REALITY, FROM
AN AMPLIFICATION
OF THE SCALES AND
CATEGORIES OF REALITY,
PERCEIVED WITH
PECULIAR INTENSITY
DUE TO AN EXALTATION
OF THE SPIRIT
WHICH TAKES IT TO A
KIND OF "LIMIT STATE".
THIS PRESENCE AND VALIDITY
OF THE TRULY MARVELOUS
WAS NOT A PRIVILEGE
UNIQUE TO HAITI,
BUT THE PATRIMONY
OF ALL OF AMERICA,
WHERE AN INVENTORY
OF COSMOGONIES,
FOR EXAMPLE, HAS
YET TO BE CONDUCTED.
THE TRULY MARVELOUS IS
FOUND AT EVERY STEP
IN THE LIVES OF THE
MEN WHO INSCRIBED DATES
IN THE HISTORY
OF THE CONTINENT
AND WHO LEFT SURNAMES
STILL USED TO THIS DAY.
CARPENTIER'S STYLE
WAS HARVESTED
FROM THE
KALEIDOSCOPIC DIVERSITY
OF THE LATIN
AMERICAN EXPERIENCE.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME,
HIS NOVELS AND SHORT
STORIES DEMONSTRATED
A PREOCCUPATION WITH
THE MUSICAL FORM,
WITH ITS
REPETITION OF THEMES
AND SELF-REFERENTIAL
STRUCTURE.
AS A JOURNALIST,
MUSICOLOGIST,
AND ART CRITIC, HE OPENED
CHANNELS OF COMMUNICATION
BETWEEN THE OLD
WORLD AND THE NEW.
CARPENTIER HAS A GOOD
MUSICAL EDUCATION.
AND WHEN HE LIVES IN
PARIS, HE WRITES
A LOT OF ARTICLES ABOUT
CONTEMPORARY MUSIC,
INCLUDING SEVERAL
ABOUT STRAVINSKY,
WHO WILL BE PART OF
"BAROQUE CONCERT".
IN THOSE UNIQUELY
AMERICAN EXPERIENCES,
THE AFRO-AMERICAN WILL
HAVE SPECIAL IMPORTANCE,
AS WELL AS BAROQUE
HERITAGE, WHICH CERTAINLY
HAD ITS IDEOLOGY AS FAR
AS AMERICA WAS CONCERNED.
HIS FIRST NOVEL,
PRAISED BE THE LORD!
WAS FIRST PUBLISHED
IN MADRID WHERE HE HAD
BEFRIENDED GARCIA LORCA
AND RAFAEL ALBERTI,
THE SPANISH POET AND MEMBER
OF THE GENERATION OF 27.
CARPENTIER RETURNED TO
CUBA IN 1933, AND IT WAS
UPON HIS REINTRODUCTION
TO THE NEW WORLD
THAT HE SAW SURREALISM
AND OLD WORLD CULTURE
AS CONVENTIONAL
AND UNIMAGINATIVE
IN COMPARISON TO HIS
NATIVE TRADITIONS.
HE PUBLISHED THE
KINGDOM OF THIS WORLD
IN MEXICO IN 1949, AND
SECURED HIS REPUTATION
WITH THE LOST
STEPS IN 1953.
IT'S VERY INTERESTING
BECAUSE FOR CARPENTIER,
SURREALISM IS A
SIGN OF LIBERATION.
HE HAD WRITTEN A NOVEL
THAT WAS PRACTICALLY
COSTUMBRISMO, OR
REALIST - ECUE-YAMBA-O!
HE LATER REGRETS
WRITING IT
WHEN HE ENCOUNTERS
SURREALISM.
BUT THEN WHEN HE RETURNS
TO AMERICA, SURREALISM
SEEMS OBSOLETE TO HIM,
ARTIFICIAL, DECADENT.
AND SO HE BEGINS THIS
NEW ERA, AND WITH THIS
"MARVELOUS REALISM" YOU
GET HIS SUBSEQUENT NOVELS.
THE GUATEMALAN WRITER AND
DIPLOMAT MIGUEL ANGEL
ASTURIAS ALSO PRACTICED
LITERARY TRANSCULTURATION.
HE TURNED THE INSTABILITY
AND INJUSTICE
OF HIS NATIVE COUNTRY
INTO A MYTHIC FICTION
IN WHICH THE MARVELS OF
NATURE COMMINGLE WITH THE
ABUSE OF POWER, WHERE THE
TELLING DETAIL BRINGS INTO
SHARP RELIEF THE HARSH
REALITY OF INDIGENOUS LIFE.
HIS 1946 BOOK, THE
PRESIDENT, IN WHICH HE
PORTRAYED A CARTOONISH
AND GROTESQUE DICTATOR,
LAMPOONED THE
REPRESSIVE RULE OF
MANUEL ESTRADA CABRERA.
IN IT HE COUNTERPOSED
THE FORCES OF LIGHT -
THE PEOPLE - WITH THE
FORCES OF DARKNESS -
THE DICTATOR - USING
A FAMILIAR PARADIGM
FROM LATIN
AMERICAN MYTHOLOGY.
THE PRESIDENT IS A
BOOK OF MILITANT,
OUTRAGED PROTEST THAT
DESCRIBES THE ATROCITIES
OF A DICTATORIAL REGIME
IN UNFLINCHING TERMS.
CRUELTY, TERROR, AND
DEATH SUFFUSE THE WORK.
HIS MYTHIC THEMES
REAPPEARED IN
MEN OF MAIZE
FROM 1949.
HERE, LIGHT IS REPRESENTED
BY THE INDIGENOUS PEOPLE,
AND DARKNESS BY
THE MEN OF MAIZE -
THE COLONIZERS WHO
COME TO EXPLOIT
THE PEASANTS' LANDS
FOR THEIR OWN BENEFIT.
IN THIS WORK, ASTURIAS
SUCCESSFULLY JOINED
THE MYTHIC-MARVELOUS
APPROACH
WITH THE BRUTAL REALITY
OF LIFE AS AN INDIAN.
THIS MOTIF IS
RESURRECTED IN HIS
BANANA PLANTATION
TRILOGY, WHICH WAS,
IN ESSENCE, A
LITERARY CRUSADE
AGAINST FOREIGN
EXPLOITATION OF GUATEMALA.
ASTURIAS, WHO WAS AWARDED
THE 1967 NOBEL PRIZE
IN LITERATURE,
BELIEVED THAT,
"THE NOVEL IS
THE ONLY MEANS OF
MAKING THE WORLD KNOW
THE NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS
OF THE PEOPLE TO
WHICH IT BELONGS".
ON THE BORDER BETWEEN
ARGENTINA AND URUGUAY,
FRAMED BY BUENOS
AIRES AND MONTEVIDEO,
IS THE RIO DE LA PLATA
REGION OF SOUTH AMERICA.
THE ESTUARY, FORMED
BY THE COMBINATION
OF THE URUGUAY
AND PARANA RIVERS,
HAS A LONG INDIGENOUS
AND COLONIAL HISTORY.
IT ALSO POSSESSES A
LITERATURE OF ITS OWN.
AMONG ITS PURVEYORS
IS JULIO CORTAZAR.
BORN IN BRUSSELS OF
ARGENTINEAN PARENTS,
HE ARRIVED IN BUENOS
AIRES AT THE AGE OF FOUR.
A SICKLY CHILD WHO
WAS A VORACIOUS READER,
HE FELL IN LOVE
AT AN EARLY AGE
WITH THE SCIENCE
FICTION OF JULES VERNE.
HE WORKED AS A
SCHOOLTEACHER
AND THEN AS A
PROFESSOR, AND IN 1938
PUBLISHED A SMALL BOOK OF
SONNETS ENTITLED PRESENCE,
WRITTEN IN THE STYLE
OF STEPHANE MALLARME.
IN 1949 HE PUBLISHED A
PLAY CALLED THE KINGS,
WHICH WAS BASED ON
THE MYTH OF THESEUS
AND THE MINOTAUR.
AN AVID ANTI-PERONIST,
HE LEFT HIS COUNTRY
IN 1951 TO WORK AS AN
INDEPENDENT TRANSLATOR
FOR UNESCO IN PARIS.
IN THAT SAME YEAR HE
PUBLISHED BESTIARY,
THE BOOK THAT
SET THE TONE FOR
WHAT WOULD BECOME HIS
CHARACTERISTIC STYLE.
FANTASTICAL AND FUNNY,
CORTAZAR'S WORKS
DREW BACK THE CURTAIN ON
REALITY TO REVEAL ITS
RICKETY METAPHYSICAL
SUPERSTRUCTURE.
YOU CAN'T TALK ABOUT
CORTAZAR AS A WHOLE.
HIS STORIES ARE
ALONG THE LINES OF
FANTASTICAL LITERATURE.
YOU SEE BORGES' INFLUENCE,
THAT WHOLE TRADITION.
AND THE NARRATIVE IS WHAT
WAS CALLED EXPERIMENTAL.
SO, ELIMINATING EVERYTHING
THE READER WAS USED TO
FROM THE REALIST NOVEL.
WE HAVE TEXTS WHERE WE DON'T
KNOW WHO THE NARRATOR IS,
MIXED UP TIME, MIXED
UP POINTS OF VIEW,
PERSPECTIVES THAT
FORCE THE READER
TO WORK IN ORDER TO
UNDERSTAND THE STORY
BECAUSE NO ONE
IS EXPLAINING IT.
AMBIGUITIES. SHIFTING VERB
TENSES. TWISTED FRAGMENTS.
SO, EVERYTHING
EXPERIMENTAL
IS WITHIN THE
TRADITIONAL NARRATIVE.
BETWEEN THE LAST
SPOONFUL OF RICE PUDDING
(A PITY THERE WAS
TOO LITTLE CINNAMON)
AND THE KISSES
BEFORE GOING TO BED,
THE BELL IN THE
PHONE-ROOM RANG,
AND ISABEL
LINGERED UNTIL
INES CAME FROM
ANSWERING IT
AND WHISPERED SOMETHING
IN HER MOTHER'S EAR.
THEY LOOKED AT
ONE ANOTHER
AND THEN THE TWO OF
THEM LOOKED AT ISABEL,
WHO THOUGHT ABOUT
THE BROKEN CAGE,
THE MULTIPLICATION
BEADS, AND A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT MISS LUCERA BEING
ANGRY BECAUSE SHE HAD
RUNG HER DOORBELL ON HER
WAY HOME FROM SCHOOL.
SHE WAS NOT
VERY WORRIED;
HER MOTHER AND INES
WERE LOOKING BEYOND HER,
ALMOST USING HER
AS A PRETEXT.
ALL THE SAME, THEY
WERE LOOKING AT HER.
ALSO ACTIVE DURING THIS
PERIOD WAS THE WRITER
SILVINA OCAMPO.
SHE WAS MARRIED TO
THE NOTED AUTHOR,
ADOLFO BIOY CASARES,
FRIENDS WITH
JORGE LUIS BORGES,
AND SISTER OF
VICTORIA OCAMPO,
A NOTED INTELLECTUAL
AND PUBLISHER OF
THE JOURNAL SUR.
LIVING IN THE
SHADOW OF THESE
LARGER-THAN-LIFE FIGURES,
SHE WROTE STORIES AND POEMS
AND PAINTED WATERCOLORS
- WORKS THAT DID NOT
MAKE AN IMPACT
DURING HER LIFETIME.
HOWEVER, IN LATER YEARS,
PRAISE OF HER LIMPID PROSE
HAS STEADILY GROWN, AND
TODAY SHE IS CONSIDERED
ONE OF THE MOST
SIGNIFICANT FEMALE WRITERS
OF TWENTIETH-CENTURY LATIN
AMERICAN LITERATURE.
HER STORIES, FORGOTTEN
VOYAGE FROM 1937
AND AUTOBIOGRAPHY
OF IRENE FROM 1948
ARE THE WORK OF AN
"ENFANT TERRIBLE"
WHO IS FIRMLY ESTABLISHED
IN, AND TWEAKS THE NOSE OF,
THE ARGENTINEAN
PATRICIAN CLASS.
THE URUGUAYAN WRITER
JUAN CARLOS ONETTI WAS,
BY CONTRAST, A
HIGH SCHOOL DROPOUT
WHO DWELLED AT THE
FRINGES OF SOCIETY.
HE CREATED A RIO DE LA
PLATA STYLE OF FICTION
THAT TRAFFICKED IN THE
MARGINALIZED FOLK OF THE
CITY, GIVING RISE TO A
LITERATURE WITHOUT EDGES,
WHERE IDENTITIES
CONVULSE AND INTERMINGLE.
FELLOW WRITER CARLOS
FUENTES WROTE THAT,
"ONETTI'S NOVELS
AND STORIES
ARE THE FOUNDATION
BLOCKS OF OUR MODERNITY.
HE GAVE ALL OF US
- HIS DESCENDENTS -
A LESSON IN NARRATIVE
INTELLIGENCE,
IN WISE STRUCTURE,
AND IN IMMENSE LOVE FOR
THE LITERARY IMAGINATION".
HE'S A WRITER WHO
CREATES A PERSONAL WORLD,
A FICTIONAL ONE, JUST
LIKE PROUST, OR FAULKNER.
AND SO IN THAT SENSE HE
BUILDS HIS OWN TERRITORY.
SO IN THAT CONSTRUCTION
THERE'S AN IMPORTANT
SUBVERSION, BECAUSE
LATIN AMERICAN FICTION
IN THE 30'S USUALLY HAS
MORE TO DO WITH A MORE
REGIONAL OR REALIST
REPRESENTATION OF TERRITORY.
THE ARTIFICE OF HAVING
ONE'S OWN TERRITORY
TO HAVE YOUR FICTION
SET DOWN ROOTS,
IS A STYLE ALL ITS OWN.
AS WAS THE CASE WITH
NEARLY ALL THE MEMBERS
OF THE RIO DE LA
PLATA MOVEMENT,
ONETTI WAS A JOURNALIST.
HE SERVED AS A COPY
EDITOR FOR MARCHA -
THE MOST IMPORTANT
URUGUAYAN PUBLICATION
OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY.
IT WAS THERE THAT
HE PUBLISHED A
LITERARY COLUMN CALLED
"THE PUDDLE STONE",
PENNING MYSTERIES AND
LITERARY GOSSIP ARTICLES.
IN 1939, HIS FIRST NOVEL,
THE PIT, APPEARED;
AND IN 1941 HE PUBLISHED
NO MAN'S LAND.
NINE YEARS LATER
HIS MAJOR WORK,
A BRIEF LIFE,
WAS PUBLISHED.
THIS NOVEL OPENED
NEW TERRITORY IN
RIO DE LA PLATA
LITERATURE.
IN IT, HE CREATED SANTA
MARIA, A MYTHICAL CITY
THAT IS THE
SPIRITUAL CAPITAL
OF ONETTI'S
NARRATIVE WORLD.
IT IS AN UNCERTAIN
PLACE, HALFWAY
BETWEEN THE TWO SHORES
OF THE RIO DE LA PLATA.
IN A BRIEF LIFE ALL HIS
NARRATIVE THEMES CONVERGE
- THE DICHOTOMY BETWEEN
IDENTITY AND THE ABSENCE
OF IDENTITY, THE
RECURRENT ANXIETY OVER
THE ROLE OF DESTINY IN
THE LIVES OF INDIVIDUALS,
AND THE DREAM WORLD AS
A SCREEN FOR REALITY.
ALL THIS PLAYED OUT
IN AN ATMOSPHERE
OF ECCENTRICITY AND
DISILLUSIONMENT.
THIS NOVEL IS CONSIDERED
ONE OF THE SEMINAL WORKS
OF LATIN
AMERICAN WRITING.
MEANWHILE, I AM THIS
LITTLE BASHFUL MAN -
UNCHANGEABLE...
THIS LITTLE MAN THAT
ANNOYS AS HE CAUSES PITY;
A MAN CONFUSED IN THE
LEGION OF LITTLE MEN
THAT WERE PROMISED
THE HEAVENLY KINGDOM.
THIS LITTLE MAN, ME AND
MY TAXI METER, INEXISTENT;
A MERE INCARNATION OF THE
IDEA OF JUAN MARIA BREUSEN.
IN TRUTH, A NOBODY.
LATIN AMERICAN WRITERS
OF THE MID 20TH CENTURY
IN A TIME OF
POLITICAL OPPRESSION
AND AESTHETIC
EXHAUSTION,
WOVE A NARRATIVE
TAPESTRY
THAT WILL ULTIMATELY
BRING ABOUT
THE LATIN AMERICAN
BOOM OF THE 1960'S.
*